Hey, Health Coach,

I’m 41, not in shape but not exactly out of shape either. I need a reliable weekly workout routine. I think doing something everyday for general health would be easier than going all out a few times a week. I don’t have any significant medical issues, just feeling creaky and stiff. Do you have suggestions for a 7-day workout routine?

– Creaky in Chicago

Dear Creaky in Chicago,
I’ve been personal training and coaching for over 20 years, and, in my experience with clients, the approach you’re pursuing is one of the most sustainable ways to maintain a basic fitness routine.

Doing a small amount of focused exercise everyday can help you stay strong, flexible, energetic and more in touch with your body’s needs—including when and what to eat. A daily routine also makes you less likely to forget to exercise or put it off until the next day.

In this column, we’ll look at how to determine the amount of exercise that feels good, the puzzle pieces of a balanced, full-body workout routine and a sample seven-day fitness schedule that can be modified to suit your needs. Always check with a health care provider or fitness professional before starting a new workout plan.
How Much Exercise Is Best?
The amount of exercise you need varies depending on your fitness level and goals. However, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the World Health Organization recommend healthy adults ages 18 to 64 aim for the following weekly goals:

150 to 300 minutes (about two and a half to five hours) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity or 75 to 150 minutes (about an hour and 15 minutes to two and a half hours) of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, or a combination of both.
Muscle-strengthening activities at least twice a week that include all major muscle groups.
For adults over 65 years old, exercises that improve balance can help prevent falls. Meanwhile, the American College of Sports Medicine recommends stretching major muscle groups, such as those in the arms and back, at least two or three times a week to help maintain flexibility.

To differentiate between moderate and vigorous activity, it’s important to pay attention to breath, says Joseph Petreycik, an exercise physiologist and nurse at Bridgeport Hospital in Connecticut. During moderate exercise, it should feel like you’re working but can breathe well enough to speak freely. Vigorous exercise pushes your breathing to the point where it’s only possible to mutter a few words at a time, he says

A large 2022 study followed the exercise habits and health of over 116,000 U.S. adults for 30 years. Researchers found that individuals who engaged in more than the recommended aerobic activity had significant reductions in all-cause mortality, with the highest association with lower mortality being at 150 to 300 minutes of vigorous physical activity per week, or 300 to 600 minutes of moderate physical activity per week. [1]

In other words, exercise is great for your health, and more is better, up to a point. But all of that cardio, plus strength, balance and flexibility training, is a lot. The numbers can be overwhelming—600 minutes is ten hours of cardio! The numbers can be overwhelming, so, to keep this simple, let’s think about how to develop a balanced routine in 30 minutes a day.

Essential Parts of a Weekly Workout
Imagine your weekly fitness routine is like one of those magnetic puzzle sets you can easily snap together with a variety of different colored geometric shapes. Each color symbolizes a different kind of workout, allowing you to create your own, unique pattern.

Here are the essential puzzle pieces to choose from:

Cardio
Strength training
Balance
Flexibility
Rest
Design your weekly workout routine by deciding what exercise you want to do each day of the week—set it and forget it—or by splitting the exercises up and moving them around each week for variety. The important thing is to sample each type of workout a few times over the course of the week. If you prefer a reliable plan, be sure to vary the frequency, intensity or type of exercise every few months to continue challenging your body and mind.

An example of a simple schedule may be cardio on Mondays and Thursdays, strength training on Tuesdays and Fridays and balance and flexibility on Wednesdays and Saturdays, plus active rest (walking or stretching) on Sundays.

Variations in Strength Training
If you’re interested in building muscle, consider organizing the days by muscle groups and assigning certain days to focus on weight-bearing exercises and different kinds of sets.

Petreycik recommends completing two to four sets of eight to 25 repetitions per exercise. The weight you choose and the number of reps depends on your goal, but you should always be able to maintain proper form, he adds. To increase muscle size and strength, he suggests aiming to max out around six to eight reps. For muscle endurance, aim for 12 to 25 reps.

Check out this Hey, Health Coach column to learn more about building muscle through resistance training.

High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT)
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) workouts feature repeated short bursts of intense activity that alternate between periods of maximum effort and low-intensity exercise or rest. As lack of time can be an obstacle when trying to develop an exercise routine, HIIT workouts can help people stay more engaged and support fitness goals with less of a time commitment, according to research.

Studies show HIIT can help improve aerobic endurance and metabolic health in people at all fitness levels, but Petreycik warns HIIT workouts can also be more stressful on the joints. “Joint pain is never a good pain with exercise,” he says. To prevent unnecessary stress to your joints, Petreyick recommends slowly increasing the frequency or duration of HIIT workouts over the course of several weeks, alternating regularly with a steady state exercise performed at a sustained, moderate effort for a continuous period of time, such as walking, running, cycling and hiking.

A Sample 7-Day Workout Routine
When creating a weekly workout routine, it’s important to keep a few key elements in mind. “Remember to stay hydrated, focus on proper form during exercises and gradually increase intensity as your fitness improves,” says Lara Heimann, a physical therapist, yoga instructor based in California and Massachusetts. Below, she offers a sample 7-day fitness schedule, including specific exercises for stability, mobility, resistance and cardiovascular training.

See my recommendations in italics to help you achieve similar exercises at home without equipment. If the sets or reps listed below are too difficult, honor your current strength level and work your way up over time.

Monday: Lower Body Strength Resistance Work
Use handheld weights or machines. For squats and lunges, keep your weight in your heels or the center of your feet to prevent your knees from extending past your toes.

Squats. Three sets of 10 reps
Lunges. Three sets of 12 reps (each leg)
Hamstring curls. Three sets of 12 reps
At home, substitute deadlifts, donkey kicks or hip presses with feet on the floor or a wall.
Calf raises. Three sets of 15 reps
Tuesday: Cardio and Core
Run, hike or cycle. 45 minutes
Plank. Three 30-second sets
Forearm plank with twists. Three sets of 15 reps
Mountain climbers. Three 1-minute sets
Wednesday: Cardio and Mobility
Yoga. 30 minutes incorporating hip, shoulder, spine and ankle mobility movements.
Walk briskly. 30 minutes
Thursday: Upper Body Strength
Use bodyweight for push-ups and then handheld weights or machines.

Push-ups. Three sets of 12 reps
If standard push-ups are too difficult, modify by keeping your knees on the floor or try push-ups against a wall, countertop or table. Keep abs engaged to support your back.
Dumbbell chest press. Three sets of 10 reps
At home, use a bench or an exercise ball supporting your head, neck and shoulders with hips held up, maintaining a straight line from your shoulders to knees.
Bent-over rows. Three sets of 10 reps
Tricep dips. Three sets of 12 reps
Friday: Cardio and Full Body
Jumping jacks. Three 1-minute sets
High knees. Three 1-minute sets
Full-body circuit of burpees, jumping lunges and push-ups. Three 30 second rounds for burpees and jumping lunges, three sets of 10 to 15 reps for push ups
Saturday: Active Recovery and Flexibility
Walk or light cycle. 20 minutes
Dynamic stretching routine. 10 to 15 minutes
Sunday: Endurance Cardio
Hike, bike or brisk walk. 60 to 100 minutes (one hour to about one hour and 40 minutes)
The Best Workout Plan for You
Your body is the final arbiter and best possible judge of the workouts and fitness schedule that work best for you. To create a workout plan that lasts, the logistics have to be built around the reality of your life.

Get Specific
Get as clear as you can about what kinds of exercise feel good, when and how you can fit them into your days and what might make them easier to do. Reduce obstacles wherever possible and make sure you have comfortable, accessible exercise clothing and equipment, dedicated windows of time and support from friends, family and colleagues to make exercise a non-negotiable part of your routine.

Keep It Interesting
Experiment with your options in each of the essential categories: cardiovascular, strength, balance, flexibility and rest. If you can find a variety of activities you enjoy in each category, you can pick and choose as the seasons or your interests change. Even if you’re a creature of habit, switching up your workout routine now and then can keep you agile and engaged. Just make sure you genuinely enjoy whatever you choose!

Be Flexible
When life throws curveballs and you find yourself unable to exercise for whatever reason, being rigid or harsh with yourself may make you prone to abandon the whole plan. If you’re flexible, you may find a few gentle exercises can help you get moving again, or you might need a few weeks to recover from unexpected events before getting back to an old (or new) routine.

If “everyday” is the defining feature of your ideal workout plan, give yourself a few quick, easy or restorative exercise options to keep the momentum going even when you’re short on time or not breaking a sweat.

Have fun, and thanks for your question, Creaky in Chicago!